README.rst, before:

PDFTextExtractor
================

A Python utility for extracting text and images from PDF files. The extracted text includes content from PDF pages and OCR-processed text from images embedded in the PDF. Results are returned as a combined list of dictionaries, preserving the order of appearance.

Features
--------

- Extract text directly from PDF pages.
- Extract and OCR-process images embedded in PDFs.
- Return results in a combined, ordered list of text and image content.
- Preprocess images to improve OCR accuracy.

Requirements
------------

### Python

- **Python Version**: 3.12 or higher

.. code-block:: shell

  pip install pdf-text-extractor

Tesseract OCR
-------------

- Tesseract Installation:
  Install Tesseract OCR and ensure it is accessible via the system’s PATH.
  Follow the Tesseract Installation Guide for details.

Usage
-----

### Import and Initialize:

.. code-block:: python

    from pdf_text_extractor import PDFTextExtractor

    # Provide the PDF file path and image directory
    pdf_path = "example.pdf"
    image_dir = "output_images"

    # Initialize the extractor
    extractor = PDFTextExtractor(pdf_path, image_dir)

### Process PDF and Extract Content

.. code-block:: python

    # Extract text and image content
    results = extractor.process_and_extract_text()

    # Display extracted content
    for item in results:
        if "text" in item:
            print("PDF Text:", item["text"])
        elif "image_text" in item:
            print("Image Text:", item["image_text"])

Output Format
-------------

The method ``process_and_extract_text()`` returns a list of dictionaries. Each dictionary contains either ``text`` or ``image_text``, corresponding to content from the PDF or OCR-processed images.

Example Output

.. code-block:: json

    [
      {
        "text": "This is text from the first page of the PDF."
      },
      {
        "image_text": "Text extracted from an image on the first page."
      },
      {
        "text": "Another page of the PDF with textual content."
      },
      {
        "image_text": "Additional image-based text extracted."
      }
    ]

How It Works
------------

### Text Extraction

- Text from PDF pages is extracted using **PyMuPDF**.

### Image Extraction

- Embedded images are extracted and saved to the specified directory.
- Images are preprocessed before OCR.

### Image Preprocessing

- **Convert to Grayscale**: Converts the image to grayscale.
- **Enhance Contrast**: Increases contrast to make text stand out.
- **Binarization**: Uses Otsu’s thresholding to create a binary image.
- **Denoising**: Applies Gaussian blur to reduce noise.

### OCR

- Preprocessed images are processed with **Tesseract OCR** to extract text.

Error Handling
--------------

- If an image fails to process, an empty ``image_text`` value is added to the results.

  Example:

  .. code-block:: json

      {
        "image_text": ""
      }

Methods
-------

### ``__init__(pdf_path, image_dir)``

**Parameters**:
- ``pdf_path`` (str): Path to the input PDF file.
- ``image_dir`` (str): Directory to save extracted images.

### ``process_and_extract_text()``

**Description**: Processes the PDF to extract text and images.

**Returns**:
- A list of dictionaries containing extracted ``text`` or ``image_text``.

Contribution
------------

Contributions are welcome! If you have suggestions or improvements, please open an issue or submit a pull request.

Commit message:

Add LLM-based refinement for OCR image text extraction
Introduced an optional feature to refine OCR-processed image text using an LLM, enhancing accuracy and readability. Updated `README` with usage examples, incremented the version to 0.2.0, and modified dependencies to include the `ollama` package. Adjusted code structure to support LLM integration and improved encapsulation for better maintainability.

README.rst, after:

PDFTextExtractor
================

A Python utility for extracting text and images from PDF files. The extracted text includes content from PDF pages and OCR-processed text from images embedded in the PDF. Results are returned as a combined list of dictionaries, preserving the order of appearance.

Features
--------

- Extract text directly from PDF pages.
- Extract and OCR-process images embedded in PDFs.
- Return results in a combined, ordered list of text and image content.
- Preprocess images to improve OCR accuracy.

Requirements
------------

### Python

- **Python Version**: 3.12 or higher

.. code-block:: shell

  pip install pdf-text-extractor

Tesseract OCR
-------------

- Tesseract Installation:
  Install Tesseract OCR and ensure it is accessible via the system’s PATH.
  Follow the Tesseract Installation Guide for details.

Usage
-----

### Import and Initialize:

.. code-block:: python

    from pdf_text_extractor import PDFTextExtractor

    # Provide the PDF file path and image directory
    pdf_path = "example.pdf"
    image_dir = "output_images"

    # Initialize the extractor
    extractor = PDFTextExtractor(pdf_path, image_dir)

### Process PDF and Extract Content

.. code-block:: python

    # Extract text and image content
    results = extractor.process_and_extract_text()

    # Display extracted content
    for item in results:
        if "text" in item:
            print("PDF Text:", item["text"])
        elif "image_text" in item:
            print("Image Text:", item["image_text"])

### Text and Image Extraction with LLM:

The latest version adds a feature to refine OCR-processed text using a language model (LLM), such as Ollama. This enhances the accuracy and readability of text extracted from images embedded within the PDF.

.. code-block:: python

    # Extract text and image content with LLM refinement for image-based text
    results = extractor.process_and_extract_text(use_llm_for_image_text=True)


Output Format
-------------

The method ``process_and_extract_text()`` returns a list of dictionaries. Each dictionary contains either ``text`` or ``image_text``, corresponding to content from the PDF or OCR-processed images.

Example Output

.. code-block:: json

    [
      {
        "text": "This is text from the first page of the PDF."
      },
      {
        "image_text": "Text extracted from an image on the first page."
      },
      {
        "text": "Another page of the PDF with textual content."
      },
      {
        "image_text": "Additional image-based text extracted."
      }
    ]

How It Works
------------

### Text Extraction

- Text from PDF pages is extracted using **PyMuPDF**.

### Image Extraction

- Embedded images are extracted and saved to the specified directory.
- Images are preprocessed before OCR.

### Image Preprocessing

- **Convert to Grayscale**: Converts the image to grayscale.
- **Enhance Contrast**: Increases contrast to make text stand out.
- **Binarization**: Uses Otsu’s thresholding to create a binary image.
- **Denoising**: Applies Gaussian blur to reduce noise.

### OCR

- Preprocessed images are processed with **Tesseract OCR** to extract text.

Error Handling
--------------

- If an image fails to process, an empty ``image_text`` value is added to the results.

  Example:

  .. code-block:: json

      {
        "image_text": ""
      }

Methods
-------

### ``__init__(pdf_path, image_dir)``

**Parameters**:
- ``pdf_path`` (str): Path to the input PDF file.
- ``image_dir`` (str): Directory to save extracted images.

### ``process_and_extract_text()``

**Description**: Processes the PDF to extract text and images.

**Returns**:
- A list of dictionaries containing extracted ``text`` or ``image_text``.

Contribution
------------

Contributions are welcome! If you have suggestions or improvements, please open an issue or submit a pull request.
